I'm a bit of a macho hiker. The hardest activity physically was squatting long enough to take a decent crap.

Self-Sufficiency
Our group of 6 was supported by 19 porters. 3 porters each.

Solitude

Food
Chicken and Chips is not hiking food. White toast is not hiking food. Having a waiter is not hiking.

Scenery


In fairness, summit day was some compensation. The weather was perfect - cold, but no wind nor rain. We set out at midnight and joined the slow dirge of hikers on the 1.3km climb to the top. Start, stop, start, stop. It wasn't long before I decided to set off on my own, led by our assistant guide Moses. We ploughed straight up the dirt hill, cutting the corners of the switchbacking trail to overtake group after group. It wasn't long before there was no one left to overtake, and it was just the two of us pushing upwards into the darkness. It's a great way to hike - no bobbing head lights above, no never ending climb. Just one leg after the other, heart rate up, breathing heavy. We summited at 4am in the morning, just the two us at the top of Africa, under a clear starry sky. Stunning. That's the solitude I was after. I did a pull up on the sign (see previous macho hiker comment). You get cold pretty quick when you're not moving, so after 15 minutes we sped back down the hill and met up with the group, now quite segmented as each person entered their own personal struggle with the mountain. To the protests of our guide, I turned around and started back up again to reach the top with the group. We soon experienced a magnificent sunrise on the side of the mountain. After a much slower ascent we summited again at 7:30, in full daylight. A very different experience that included stunning views of the glaciers and the crater which I hadn't seen in the dark. The summit was much busier this time around, with a queue for photos lined with bitchy altitude-crazed hikers.

The summit was an incredible experience, but was it worth the 6 days and hefty price tag? I have to conclude no.
